---
title: How it Works
---

import YggdrasilNetwork from "@site/src/pages/how-it-works/yggdrasil-network";

# How it Works

SamizdApp currently uses a lot of existing tech and piggybacks on existing
protocols. This is an overview of everything that happens under the hood.

## The Software

### Pleroma

Our first app is a social media alternative called
[Pleroma](https://git.pleroma.social/pleroma/pleroma) with a custom frontend
called [Soapbox](https://gitlab.com/soapbox-pub/soapbox).

## The Architecture

The SamizdApp network is partly a **private [libp2p](https://libp2p.io/)
network**, and is part of the
**[Yggdrasil Network](https://yggdrasil-network.github.io/)**.

### Box <-> Box Communications

SamizdApp boxes are federated over the **Yggdrasil Network**.

When it boots up, your box will create a **public Yggdrasil address** for
itself by opening up a **UPnP port on your network's router**. This will allow
other boxes to connect to yours.

Your box will then access the Yggdrasil network by finding and connecting to
_another_ box with a public Yggdrasil address. Once connected to a public box,
your box will now have access to the entire SamizdApp network through
Yggdrasil.

The other box that you first connect to will now **relay** all of your traffic
across the SamizdApp network. This could be a problem if the other box goes
down, but won't be as long as your box is able to find _additional_ boxes with
public Yggdrasil addresses.

By creating a public Yggdrasil address for itself (via the UPnP port that it
opens on your router), your box makes itself available as a relay to other
boxes on the SamizdApp network.

<div className="yggdrasil-network">

<style>
  {`
    .yggdrasil-network {
        margin: 50px auto 75px;
        width: 700px;
        max-width: 100%;
    }

    .yggdrasil-network svg {
        width: 100%;
    }
    `}
</style>

<YggdrasilNetwork />

</div>

### Client <-> Box Communications

Clients and boxes communicate with each other over a **private libp2p
network**.

A **client** is a device (i.e. a phone or a laptop) that is paired to your box.
You can pair a new client to your box by following the
[Getting Started docs](../../docs/getting-started/install-client), which
will have you install the client app on your device.

#### Via LAN

Clients will initially be paired to your box over your **LAN** (or whatever
network your device uses to connect to your box). Once your client is paired,
the client app will be able to access your box over your LAN as long as it is
connected.

#### Via the Internet

When it boots up, your box will create a **public _client_ address** for
itself by opening up a **UPnP port on your network's router**. This will allow
_clients_ to connect to your box.

Pending additional security, only _your_ client can access the services on
_your_ box. If your client is connected to a public network (i.e. the
internet), it will access your box via your box's public client address.
However, if your box does not have a public client address, your client can
still access your box by connecting to _another_ box with a public client
address. In this circumstance, the other box that your client connects to will
**relay** all of the traffic between your client and your box.

By creating a a public client address for itself (via the UPnP port that it
opens on your router), your box makes itself available as a relay to other
clients on the SamizdApp network.
